---
title: "Cochineal identification: how molecular techniques can distinguish between biological control agents and agricultural pests."
collection: talks
type: "Conference proceedings talk, 2nd International Congress of Biological Control (ICBC2)"
permalink: /talks/2021-04-26_ICBC2
venue: Davos
date: 2021-04-26
location: "Switzerland"
---

Invasive Cactaceae cause considerable damage to ecosystem function and agricultural
practices around the world but some cacti are also important and valued crop species. The most
successful biological control agents used to combat cactus weeds belong to the
genus *Dactylopius* (Hemiptera: Dactylopiidae), commonly known as ‘cochineal’, but the worst
pests of cactus crops are also members of this genus. Cochineal lineages used for biocontrol of
cactus weeds are host specific and only certain species and lineages will feed on cactus crops,
so cactus biocontrol can be safely implemented without harm to cactus agriculture. Many of
the *Dactylopius* species are so morphologically similar, and in the case of intraspecific lineages,
identical, that numerous misidentifications have been made in the past. These errors may result
in cactus farmers incorrectly assuming that the biocontrol agent is damaging their crop. This
study aimed to generate a multi-locus genetic database to enable the accurate identification of
dactylopiids. This was achieved through the nucleotide sequencing of three gene regions (12S
rRNA, 18S rRNA, and COI) and two inter-simple sequence repeats (ISSR). Nucleotide
sequences were very effective for species-level and *D. tomentosus* lineage-level identification,
but could not distinguish between the two lineages within *D. opuntiae* commonly used for
biological control of various *Opuntia* spp. Fragment analysis through the use of ISSRs
successfully addressed this issue. This is the first time that a method has been developed that
can distinguish between these two *D. opuntiae* lineages. Using the methods developed here,
one can distinguish between what is a potential pest, and what is a beneficial biological control
agent.

Citation: **van Steenderen, C.J.M.**, Paterson, I.D., Edwards, S., and Day, M.D. 2021. Cochineal identification: how molecular techniques can distinguish between biological control agents and agricultural pests. 2nd International Congress of Biological Control (26 - 30 April 2021), Davos, Switzerland virtual conference.
