---
title: "South Africa is a hotspot for previously unknown stem-boring wasps of grasses (*Tetramesa*; Eurytomidae)"
collection: talks
type: "Conference proceedings talk, Grassland Society of Southern Africa, 56th Annual Congress"
permalink: /talks/2021-07-26_GSSA
date: 2021-07-26
location: "South Africa, online event"
---

The stem-boring wasp genus *Tetramesa* (Hymenoptera: Eurytomidae)
comprises 203 species that feed exclusively on grasses. The wasps are highly
host-specific, typically feeding on a single or a few closely-related grasses, and
can cause significant damage to their host grass (e.g. reducing seed production,
increasing tiller mortality). These attributes often result in *Tetramesa* being
serious grain pests, but it also makes them ideal biological control agent
candidates for controlling invasive grasses. Very little is known about the
Afrotropical Hymenoptera in general, and to date, almost all the sampling effort
in collecting and describing *Tetramesa* species has taken place in the northern
hemisphere. Only four African species have been described; none of which are
from South Africa. The Centre for Biological Control (CBC) at Rhodes
University has been investigating biological control options for several African
grasses that have become invasive in Australia and the Americas, and have been
collecting *Tetramesa* specimens across South Africa since 2017. The insect
communities associated with more than 60 different native grasses have been
surveyed over this period. The uniform morphology of adult and larval
*Tetramesa* has, however, made it impossible to determine whether these wasps
are a single polyphagous species, or multiple oligophagous and/or
monophagous species. We are currently using genetic barcoding tools
(mitochondrial COI and nuclear ITS2 regions) and species delimitation methods
to solve this problem. Our preliminary results have identified at least six potentially undescribed *Tetramesa* species from South Africa. Each novel
*Tetramesa* species was highly specific, with five of the six potential species
feeding and completing their development on a single host grass species. This
work will facilitate using biological control techniques to manage invasive alien
grass species and highlights a previously unknown diversity of *Tetramesa*
species associated with South African grasses. It is likely that we will uncover
many more undescribed *Tetramesa* species in the region as our sampling effort
escalates.

Citation: Sutton, G.F., **van Steenderen, C.J.M.**, Canavan, K., Yell, L., & Paterson, I.D. (2021). South Africa is a hotspot for previously unknown stem-boring wasps of grasses (*Tetramesa*; Eurytomidae). 56th Annual Congress of the Grassland Society of Southern Africa (27 - 29 July 2021), Online Event.
